Daemons first appear in ancient Greek mythology. They're neither good, nor bad - they're more like spirits that carry luck, or fate, or inspiration. They can be attached to people, or places, or just moving through the world, changing things.

They don't have a physical existence - they're only known in the world of humans by their effects. Beings of pure agency, magnetic fields pulling on the iron filings of the grubby world of matter. They're not gods though - they're more like manifestations of the gods intent. Engineers of the gods will. Messengers between our world and Mount Olympus.

Daemons, in this sense, pop up again in the mid 19th century as agents of thermodynamics in a thought experiment designed by a Scottish physicist named James Robert Maxwell. He was trying to work out if the second law of thermodynamics could, theoretically, be violated. The second law, as I'm sure we all know, essentially states that the amount of energy in a system will always decrease - it's the reason a perpetual motion machine could never exist, because it would always lose energy somewhere.

Imagine a box, said Maxwell. This box is full of gas molecules, happily bouncing around. There's a divider down the middle of this box, with a little door in it. Maxwell's daemon is a spirit charged with operating this door, and is given the task of opening it up when it sees molecules coming which are moving particularly quickly - the hot ones. This way, you end up with a box containing hot gas on the one side of the divider, cold on the other and you can use that temperature difference to drive a heat engine.

In the early 1960s, programmers at MIT were creating a new kind of computer process which beavered away industriously in the background, keeping various critical systems running, but never showing anything to the user. This group needed a name for their invention, and one of them, Fernando J. Corbato had a background in physics. He remembered Maxwell's daemon. The analogy seemed apt, and so they named their background processes daemons. This nomenclature was inherited by the Unix operating system, descendants of which power many of the computers, tablets and phones in the world today.

By typing a couple of commands on my computer right now, I can easily get a list of the background processes which are currently running and how many of them there are. All of which means that while counting the number of angels dancing on the head of a pin is a famously thankless task, the number of daemons working away inside the much tighter pathways of my laptop's processor is an easily quantifiable [x].

